From Hansel minutes.com. It's
Hansel minutes, but weekly discussion
with web developer and technologists.
Scott Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 26. Recorded Monday, July 24th, 2006.
Support for Hanselman it's just
provided by COVID Smith tools,
makers of code Smith, an
extensible template based code generator
for.net and now handsome and
its listeners get $100 off
COVID Smith professional with coupon
code H M 100 online@covidsmithtools.com.
And don't forget to visit
Peter bloom.com. Start with better
controls finish with better sites
online@peterblum.com and.net developers journal the
world's leading dotnet developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott discusses internationalization. Hi, this
is Carl Franklin. Welcome back to
another great episode of Hansel
minutes. I'm here with Scott
Hanselman. Hi, Scott all are
Carl and I'm never here
with anybody else, but you
it's all about Scott, the
show in case you haven't
been listening today, the topic
is internationalization. See, Carl has
been that  it's the
episode.  Just kidding. So,
so what are we talking
about today? International? Good, very
exciting. More exciting in Spanish,
but still We're in a
little bit of a wacky
mood. I am feeling rather
well, 104 degrees in Portland
right now. Yeah. So I'm
looking for any opportunity to
say  very good until
that opportunity comes up. It's
going to be an English
today. So are we just
talking about websites or are
we talking about windows applications
too? What's a, I know
you're a web guy. I'm
a web guy, but, But
everything that we're talking about
for the most part is
going to apply to just
internationalization as a concept because
underneath all of the stuff
that we're talking about, there
is the notion of the
current threads culture and the
current threads Culture. So we'll
probably talk about it. Yeah.
It's be.net and some of
the general culture things, but
most of these things apply
to a, to win forums
as well. Okay, great. Let's
get started. So most people
think about internationalization as being
just, you know, you make
a bunch of resources and
you put all your strings
in another, in another folder
and it's all good. Is
that pretty much sum it
up for you? Yeah, that's
pretty much the way I
thought about it. I haven't
done it. So, you know,
so sometimes The terms, internationalization,
globalization and localization are all
used interchangeably. Yes. I've noticed
this internationalization and globalization are
mostly synonyms. They are preparing
your application to be localized
localizing. Your application is the
actual converting of your application
to use strings from a
particular language. So I can
write an application in English,
have it globalized, but not
yet localized. And then when
I translate it into Spanish,
it might then become a
little Localized application. So, so
globalization is what you do,
Judy or application to make
it localized to the user
locally. It's a bowl localizable
to the user. Yeah, exactly.
There's all Sorts of great
places to start. When you're
learning about this stuff. There's
a really great article by
a wing mainly@on.net, which is
at shrink stir slash GV
E. And this is a
really great article. It talks
about asp.net to O localization,
but in some of the
improvements that they've made back
in the day, if you
wanted to change the current
thread, you know, the current
executing thread to a different
culture, you had to do
this kind of work yourself.
Basically it worked like this.
There is the, you know,
system dot threading dot thread
dot current thread tells you
all sorts of information about
the current executing thread with
asp.net. You're pulling threads of
execution from a pool. So
even though Carl might go
from page one dot ASP
X to page two and
have a sense of continuity,
that sense of continuity on
the service side is really
artificial. You have things like
the session object to maintain
state, and that thread of
execution is going to be
different. It needs to be
set up for the user
before the page starts executing.
So in the past, it's
been a very common to
sniff the browser and say,
well, what language does this
browser speak? Because if you
go to tools, options, languages
in a internet Explorer and
in a similar menu in
Firefox, people will set up
a list of languages that
they speak in the order
that they prefer to get
them. And those are returned
in a header, an HTP
header that's passed in every
time you request something from
your, from your server. So
you look at this except
languages header, and on most
systems it'll say Ian or
Ian us, or Ian UK.
But for example, if you're
visiting from Morocco, they may
want English first, French second,
and Arabic third, or in
some order like that. So
it's really been the responsibility
of the person on the
server to look at that
except languages header. And they
typically use that with request
dot user languages. And if
they wanted the first one,
they would say, request out
user language is at zero.
They pull off that, that
culture that's an ISO or
an international standards organization, standard
language identifier, like E N
U S or a Z
H H H H K
would be Chinese in Hong Kong.
And they would take that
and create what's called a
culture info object. And that
culture info optic would get
stuck on the current thread.
Now, this is very interesting.
I always thought that localization
happened at the application level.
You're saying it happens at
the thread level. Well, the
systems re the, the, the,
all the, all of the
goodness in localization, as far
as pulling strings out stems
from a thing called system
dot resources and system dot
resources is the namespace that
handles all of the reading
and writing of resources. It's
got four major classes, resource
manager, reader, resource set, and
resource writer. And you typically
call this function, get string.
So you say, you know,
make a resource manager and
you call get string, get
string looks at the current
threads, UI culture for its
resource selection. So if I
go and say system dot,
threading dot current thread dot
current UI culture equals blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah, Ian
U S. And when I
asked the resource manager later,
it's going to go and
look for U S type
stuff. Makes perfect sense. Because
you may be serving on
a website. You know, every
thread is a different user
and every thread can be
looking at a different expression
of the site. Exactly. Yep.
The current UI culture is
for resource selection. The current
culture is a different thing,
and this can be a
little confusing. It's the thing
that handles formatting of dates,
numbers, and string comparisons. So
these can be different. You
could say, well, I speak
French, but I want my
data numbers and stuff done
in, in Spanish. Now with
a WinForms person, this has
done automatically for you. So
whatever the current system is
set up for, you'll just
inherit, right? You could force
your application to work in
English on a French system
by setting the culture manually
yourself. Now I had kept
saying Ian U S as
an example, but the end
part is the non specific
part of things. It's just
saying English, right? It's not
making any judgments about English
were just like I could
say IES. And that would
mean Spanish. Well ESBL dash
MX means Spanish in Mexico
versus E S E S,
which is Spanish in Spain.
So there's a hierarchy and
that hierarchy can become very
powerful. So let's say that
my application has a hundred
strings and I'm going to
have, by default, my application
will be in English. So
I might have my default
resources, LinkedIn with my main
application. So I've got a
hundred strings name, value pairs,
and they're all LinkedIn defaults
English, but I want to
have three different strings of
those hundred, be different for
people in the UK. I
could make an Ian dash
UK satellite assembly, a separate
assembly that would live underneath
my Ben folder with just
those three different strings. And
then we'll have what's called
resource fallback. If I request
a string that's in that
assembly, I'll get it. If
I request a string, that's
not in that assembly will
fall back using a standard
fallback hierarchy. Scott, is there
a naming convention for these
assemblies? Did you, do you
have to name it and
dash UK dot DLL? Or
is it a, There is
a naming convention. It typically
it's whatever you want, dot
locale.dll.resources.deal. So I typically say
things like, you know, Constance
dot E N U S
dot resources dot DLL, and
someone like Michelle. Michelle Bustamante
has a really good article
on best practices and internationalization.
And that is at shrinks
or slash G V eight.
And she suggests things like
a glossary, separate assembly and
a one for global things.
And one for local things.
And one for Constance, you
can lay this out really
any way that you want
with asp.net one. Oh, it
was all about you. You
got to make the decisions
you had to do all
the work. Typically you would
in the begin request event
before any page got loaded,
you'd go and look at
their cookies. See if they
had overwritten something with some
profile settings that you said
elected. If they didn't have
a specific preference, you'd look
at their request, user languages,
and then you'd set the
current threat up. So then
later on, when the page
actually got around to executing,
your thread would be prepared
for, you know what I'm
saying? It wouldn't be up
to the page to do
that work. It really be
up to the, the begin
requests. You know, a module
earlier in the process. Now
an ass be done have
to, Oh, all that's done
for you because they've added
new stuff on the page
at the page director where
you go like at page.
And then you have all
that information at the very
first line of the page,
right? You can say culture
equals auto UI culture, equal
auto and asp.net will automatically
map those, those except language
HTTP headers to a culture
info object and put them
on the current thread. Now,
Scott, here's the question for
you? You know, you always
see you go to these
big conglomerate websites. And the
first thing they do is
they ask you to pick
a country. Is that more
of, you know, they have
different content based on what
country you're in or is
that language? I mean, you
know, I mean, why are
they asking you to pick
your culture? If, if the
browser already knows what culture
you're in, You have absolutely
nailed my number one, pet
peeve about this. It is
so stupid to get to
a site and have them
ask me what language I
speak when they don't know,
they know darn well, what
language I speak. Yeah. I
also don't like it when
applications say, you know, if
you have an awesome browser
and you have a big
monitor, go here. Yeah. They
know this stuff. JavaScript knows
your monitor size, you know,
your browser. It's just silly.
If, if, if I've actually
gone to the effort to
put French as my number
one language will for goodness
sake, give me French. If
Google does a great job
about this, not only do
they let you select your
own language, you can go
into the preferences section of
Google from their homepage and
say, you know, I really
want my, my language to
be Zulu. So you can
go in. And the very
first choice they have under
preferences is select the language,
go all the way to
the bottom. You hit Zulu,
hit, save preferences, visit a
Google. And it actually says
right at the top, Google
is Zulu. And I think
that's so cool. They, they,
they know this stuff about
you. If you visit Google
by going tools, options, languages,
and select any language, Google
knows it that's really classy
of Google. It would be
lame if they put every,
a flag of every country
in the entire world up
on your, so personally, we
like to make that a
default to the language they
say, they speak and give
them the choice to override
it. I think that's the
right thing to do. Wikipedia.org
has that, but is that
a little bit different? Because
they have, So that's a
very interesting point because Wikipedia
has totally different amounts of
content, right? So they have
much less Spanish than they
do in English. And The
content seems to is cultural
by nature. Right? Right, Right.
So in an instance like
that, it would be appropriate
in my opinion, to sniff
the browser, using requests that
use your languages and depending
on what content you have
available, redirect them to that
separate part of your site
And still let them choose,
you know, other languages. If
they, you know, if you're
a French speaking English person,
you might want to look
something up in French. A
very interesting point, because as
a, as a person involved
in banking, we're dealing with
folks that speak other languages,
but are typically using a
certain kind of currency. So
what if you're a German
guy banking with a Japanese
bank, you know, ideally you'd
want to see in and
see it in German. But
then it gets to an
interesting question. And this is
one of the, the, the
little details about internationalization. A
lot of people forget about
is what about input? What
do the dates look like?
What do the decimals look
like? Displaying a date using
the current culture is really
easy. If you use a
tool like Chris sells format
designer at strengthener slash G
U Q, you can use
the two string features in,
in windows. So I can
say daytime.now, dot two string
quote, capital D. And that
capital D is a format
string that will say, I
want a long date, but
it doesn't just say, I
want a long date. It
says, I want a long
date given the current culture.
Now, you know, in, in
the States, you'll get Monday
comma, September 25th, that duh, but
elsewhere, you might get an
entirely different string. And if
you're speaking a language, that's
not even close to English
or you're speaking Arabic or
Hebrew or whatever, you're going
to get all those characters
as well. Now it's very
ethnocentric of us as Americans
to assume that month, day,
year is the way to
go. I was just going
to say this because I
was interview interviewing Adam Cogan.
And he says, do you
know that the United States has
the most screwed up date
format in the entire world?
It's different than everyone else
in the world? Is this
what you're going to talk
about? Yeah. I was talking
to a Clemens masters and
I said, I was telling
him how nine 11 really
messed me up. And he
said, yeah, November 9th was a
really rough day for me
too. You know? And I
was like, wow, she kind
of shook me for a
second there. And I realized
that, you know, who, who
are we to take over
an entire date? Yeah. So
do that a lot. If
you set your current culture
to a specific date format,
what's called a date format
info object. You're not just
making a contract with the
user that you're going to
show month, day, year, or
day, month year, but that
you're going to also accept
them. And this can be
a real problem for folks
that don't think about that
within the context of JavaScript
validation. This is one of
the primary reasons that I
started using Peter blems validation
controls is that he actually
detects the current, the current
culture on the server side
and generates the correct JavaScript
to do localized JavaScript validation
based on the date format.
Peter, you need to raise
your prices. Yeah. You're giving
this stuff away. He does
need to raise his prices.
That feature is huge. If
you're doing internationalization, internationalization and
JavaScript is hard, hard, hard,
no fun. Yeah. He really
made that easy. So I
like that. Now one, a
little plug for myself though,
and which calls back to
an article that was written
at MSDN about internationalization and
the article was at shrinks
or slash GUP. And I
modified it at shrink stir
slash G U V as
in Victor was this notion
of what's called pseudo internationalization.
Now this is really cool.
Typically people will start out
with the project and they'll
say, we really want someday
to translate that, translate this
into Spanish. And they'll kind
of start kind of half-assed
and they'll maybe change a
couple strings to OLAW and
then they'll say, why we're
we're done well, pseudo internationalization,
we'll take a Residex file
written in English, and it
will convert every single character
to a high Latin character,
right? A non a through
Z character like you with
a new lot or Schwab
or just whatever, and turn
it into a funky character,
but it's still readable. So
go to shrink, stir slash
G UV and check this
out. I think you'll appreciate
it. And it gives you
an example of what these
kinds of things would look
like. So I might have
a string like transaction download.
And what I want to
do is not only change
the string. So I can
prove that my application works
with non-lab, you know, high,
high order characters, nonstandard characters.
It doesn't, it doesn't mess
up the encoding, but four
sentences of a certain length.
You need to expand them.
You need to make them
fatter because other languages might
make a sentence as big,
as big as a 30,
40% larger. So a pseudo
internationalize here will not only
take all of your English
and convert it into a
funky language, a pretend language.
It's a, it's a pseudo
language, but it'll also make
your strings longer. This allows
you to see if I
translate this into German, is
it gonna make my rapping
look bad? Right? If you
put this in the context
of a continuous integration system
where you're doing your builds
automatically, you can automatically pseudo
internationalize your entire application and
know what it will look
like in a foreign language
without having to have a
really tight loop with the
internationalization folks. You see what
I'm saying? Yeah. With this
particular format, which is so
funky, but still very readable
English stands out on the
page and that's how you
go. Ooh, I missed that
label. Oh, I totally forgot
this button. See what I'm
saying? It's a very, very
nice technique. So Scott, Let
me ask you a question
about Unicode because you know,
most Westerners and most people
in the United States only experience
the ASCII internet, you know,
the English internet. But if
you go to like a
Korean or Japanese or a
Chinese website, you're going to
find all sorts of strange
characters. And it's because their
alphabets are bigger than 26
letters or 256 possible combinations
or characters. How does Unicode
help us in.net? Well, I
can, I'll explain a little
bit of it to you,
but for the, for the
full on version checkout, Joel
on software, he's got a
great article that shrinks her
slash V six. The article
is entitled a modestly, the
absolute minimum, every software developer
absolutely positively must know about
Unicode and character sets no
excuses. It sounds like something
that I would have would
have written, but he beat
me to it by about
three years. And so, you
know, the idea is that
back in the day, right,
when you know, EBC DIC,
right. Episodic was on the
way out when episodic was
on the way out, ASCII
was really the way things
were happening, where letter a
started at 65 and, you
know, the kind of stuff
that you would see in
dos. And you'd see in
char map, if you look
at the first zero to
two 55, And we're talking
about the United States here, Well,
we're starting with United States to
start with because we're the
ones that said, Oh, it's
going to be this way.
Right, right. But you're varying
bringing up a very valid
point because I did a
lot of work in like
91, 92, we were translating
applications like NEC machines in
that spoke Japanese. And you
had to load these things
called code pages up into,
into Ram and mess with
them basically on, on a
one PC, one character code
would be an E with
an Oxycontin goo. And on
another one, it would be
a Hebrew letter, Hebrew letter,
this and that they would
assign different meaning to different
characters. So we might think
a was 65, but they
might disagree. They would have
a code page that would
map those codes for their
purposes. Right. Usually everyone would
leave the zero through one
27 numbers to themselves, but
they figured above, you know,
above their one 28 to
two 55 was pretty much
just a playground. Yeah. So
then you'd have these code
pages and there's a whole
pile of them. If you
can go Google for, you
know, dos code pages and
you'll find that there's lots
of different code pages out
there, mostly one for different
country, you know, Israel had
their own yada yada yada.
So this was just a
way of putting a pair
of Rose colored glasses on
top of some encoded data.
So sometimes you'll, you'll do
that. Now you'll arrive at
a page and it'll look
like crap. And then you'll
go up to the view
menu and say encoding more.
And there's a whole list
of all the different code
pages that could still be
encoded out there on the
internet. If you do that
now, you'd be surprised how
big the menu is on
your browser. Just go view
and coding more. And in
this huge thing, flies open
that tells you all these
code pages that were were,
were out there. And we're
still talking about mapping over
a single octet. Right? Exactly.
Exactly. This is the, the,
the server didn't tell me
enough information. I couldn't glean
it. So, you know, you
know, better. Yeah. So then
we started doing the whole
double bite character set, and
that's what I started doing.
The Japanese stuff myself, where
some of the letters were
stored in, in two bites.
And then it became really
difficult because when someone said,
what is the length of
the string? Well, what do
you mean by length? Right?
Characters, do you mean mean
bites Gary Lang? And this is
a, I remember adding some
code at Crescent software that
we had some Japanese port
of some of our tools
in, in this was a
problem. It was double byte
characters, but, but it was
still within the context to
ask you. Yeah. So Unicode
introduces this notion of being
called a code point, which
is just, you know, a
number that represents a glyphs,
right. A particular, a particular
letter in, in some language,
but it doesn't necessarily say
anything about how it's going
to be encoded. It kind
of leaves that part up
to the implementers. So Unicode
isn't saying it shall be
and coded like this. It's
just a catalog of all
of these different code points
that say a, is you
41? Why just cause and
what a ends up looking
like on disc is w
was up to some other
people. And then there was
the whole issue of high
Indian and low Indian. Can
you explain that again? So
uni code goes with assigns
a number to every letter
in all the different alphabets
and celebrities that are out
there. Actually, there is actually
definition of every letter in
every culture in Unicode, Everyone
that has been submitted to
the Unicode organization that they've
said, yes. That's cool. I
see. So like if you
go up and look@aunicode.org, I
think, I think Ethiopian Amharic
got in recently uni code.org.
And there's a whole list
I can cling ons in
there probably now. So you
can go and say, you
go click on Unicode character,
database. They just got version
five out. You can click
on it. You can go
and say, well, what's changed.
What's new code charts. And
then go in. And there's
a whole online edition that
you can order and check
out the database full of
all these different things. So
if there's a particular character
that you're fond of, you
know, some Tamel character or
whatever that has a number
that's assigned to it, right.
A is 41. That's the
only one I know. I
assume be as 42, I'd
have to look it up.
You can find all this
with char map, right? If
you just go file, you
know, start run char map,
that's all up there. So
those numbers though, don't necessarily
say how that will look
on disc now a is
41, which means that it
would be really nice to
go and say, Hey is
going to be 41 on
disk. Right. Right. But if
we go and say, well,
Unicode is every, everything's two
bites. Cause we're going to
do UCS two and everything
will be two bites. Then
a would be zero, zero
four one. Okay. But are
we talking about big Indian
or low Indian, right. Which
at which end is the
most significant. Okay. Sure. So
then it could be zero,
zero four, one or four
one zero zero. So this
is when you see things
like that, refer to the
Unicode bomb, the BOM, that's
the byte order. Mark. This
is a, a, it's a
weird thing, but it's basically,
we'll put two bites at
the beginning of any Unicode
string. That'll tell you whether
or not we're big Indian
or little Indian. It's amazing
to me that in 2006,
we're still dealing with the
difference between big Indian and
little again. We just, well,
we can't, we settle on
this now. Come on. Do
you know that that, that
Macs are big Indian and
the internet is big Indian.
So max don't have to
do any work to translate
stuff as they drop it
onto the internet because TCP
IP at that low, low,
low, low level is big
Indian, but Intel is, is
little Indian. So the network
cards or the software somewhere
deep in the stack, I
don't know. I think it's
in the, in the card
now, but it used to
be in the stack where
as things headed out, we
had to flip it. And
as it came back in,
we flipped it back to
like every single bite that
was going out was getting
moved, flipped around because Intel
is not the same as
TCP. And it looks like
that's not going to change
anytime soon, You know, do
I care? This is right.
And any problem in computer
science is solved by one
additional layer of obstructions to
hide it from me, lie
to me. And I'm cool
with that. So this bite
order, Mark, that was really
important because sometimes you'll see
this in the wild. Not
always you'll see this, but
this is one of the
reasons I really like notepad
too. Because if you run
notepad to at the very
bottom of notepad, two in
the M in the status
bar, it tells you whether
or not you're looking at
a Unicode file or a
UTF file. And if you
go file in coding with
a notepad two, you can
switch back and forth between
these different encodings two different
times. This week, I had
to debug a problem where
someone thought, excuse me, two
different times this week I
had to debug a problem
where someone thought a file
was saved a certain way,
but it wasn't. And it
turned out. It was because
their text editor wasn't advertising
that fact, right? They could
go save as, and at
the bottom of the save
as dialog, select utfh for
their encoding, but it kept
getting encoded as antsy and
they lost data. So they
opened up back again and
they ended up getting, you
know, black squares. Hmm. So
anyway, those code points, sorry,
you were gonna say, I
just said, that's really lame.
This is life though. The
thing is, if you stick
with utfh and you read
this article by Joel and
you use editors that understand
utfh nine times out of
10, you'll be fine. Things
go wrong. When you don't
realize that a string isn't
a certain encoding and you
make an assumption like you
might do utfh everywhere, but
maybe you're talking to some
old database or some old
backend system. And you've been
thinking, yeah, we're internationalized. We're
great, but you've never done
a test. You've never taken
the word Jose and sent
it through the system, saved
it and brought it back.
So you never really know.
And then one day you
sent Jose in and it
comes back hoes, and then
you are screwed or hosed
at that point because you
never tested it. Right. So
always include some internationalized data
in your testing and round
trip. It it's so important.
Another really common thing people
do is they'll make an
XML file to retrieve an
XML file from somewhere. And
they'll look at that first
line, the prologue there, where
it'll say, you know, question
Mark XML and coding equals
utfh, but there's never anything
inside that file that is
in fact Unicode or unit
utfh. So they'll never know
that their system ultimately doesn't
understand it. I've worked with
a number of mainframes that
we're bringing back XML data,
but they were just strained,
concatenating the data. And they
just assume that that line
at the top was important
and they would just stick
utfh at the top, but
they couldn't handle anything other
than asking. Yeah. This might
be a kind of a
strange, or I don't know
if I'm talking under or
over people here, but I
want to know what, what's
the difference between all these
different formats utfh ANSI ASCII,
give us a little primer.
So w We can read
this Joel on software article.
It's great. But ASCII was
basically an agreement that zero
through two 55 would be
these characters, right? This did,
that became the ANSI standard,
right? Everyone agrees that we're
going to do one thing
up to a hundred, up
to a one 27. And
then from there on, you
know, knock yourself out, right.
Unicode gets together and, and
figuring out all these different
code points and then comes
up, and this is important.
It comes up with a
number of ways to encode
the same data. So you
can take this a Unicode
code point and save it
as a file as Unicode,
or save it as utfh
or UCS or whatever In
UTF seven, also, right. Of
UCF seven. So there's all
these different ways, and you're
not necessarily losing information. You're
just encoding it differently. Now,
here's a really interesting way
to, if you really want
to understand how to do
this, check this out, go
into an app and like
a note pad or note
pad too, and type in
just like ABC, I'm doing
this right now, type in
ABC. You go file, save
as, and we're going to
go. And I'm going to
say that this file is
going to be a, a,
a Unicode file. Okay. That
usually doesn't mean utfh, it
usually means unique code with
a byte order. Mark, I'm
going to save it on
my, and on a, save
it with a very small
file name. This is very
important. Save it with like,
you know, one dot text,
then go to the dos
prompt, go to command exe,
go to the directory where
your file is and type
in debug, just literally debug
one.one dot TXT. And then
it's going to churn for
a second. And you're going
to get a little hyphen
that'll pop up then push
D D for dump. And
you'll see the contents of
your file by just done
that you'll see the actual
hex values. Right? So I'm
looking at this and I
see FF F E that's
the first two bites of
two fights, Whether it's big
Indian or little Indian. Right.
So I can see that
it says F E and
a, and then we know
that we're dealing with a
little Indian system, right. A
little Indian encoded at this,
at this point. Okay. So
now those first two bites
say FFE, then I see
61, zero, zero. Well, I
know 61 in this case
is a, and I see
zero, zero, because I explicitly
told my editor to save
this as a 60 ones,
lowercase a, I told my
editor to save this with
two bytes. So we've encoded
a code point on the
disc and we're ending up
using two, two bytes. So
now I'm going to take
that exact same file. I'm
going to go in, in
a notepad two, I'm gonna
say encoding. Utfh I'm going
to save this exact same
file as to dot TXT,
go back in, run debug
again, on the new thing,
debug that takes, and you
can use a hex editor,
but I like debug. So
now of course you do.
Of course I do. I'm
just saying that it's there,
right? Why go get a
hex editor and trying to
impress somebody so debug to
dot TXT. And then suddenly
I see 61 62 63
ABC. Now here's the big,
here's the kind of philosophical
question, right? Like if a
tree falls in the woods,
does, does it make a
sound? And if no, one's
there to hear it. Is
this UTF eight and coded?
It's just three bites. Yeah.
It looks like ASCII. Exactly.
So UTF eight really is
a way to encode stuff
where it says, use two
bites if you need to.
But it was an evil
thing because it was set
up such that English text
is identical and utfh as
it was in ASCII. So
think basically things work for
us. Yeah. That's a little
weird. Yeah. So for ANSI,
for asking for, if, you
know, for folks that were
doing stuff before, If in
the middle of ABC, you
wanted to put a, you
know, Chinese, Chinese character, would
you have the two byte
header at the beginning? So,
so let's find out right.
And the, and the other
question is if you didn't
have those, okay, well, FF
and Effie will never be
Asking, well, there's no, there's
no bite order Mark on
this particular utfh file. Cause
it didn't, it didn't need
it. Now, the reason that
they did this was because
they didn't want it to
break existing code. Right. So
what's nice about a UTF
eight encoded string is that
if it's just got low
ASCII stuff in it, then
existing code will work just
fine. So now I'm just
going to go to china.yahoo.com.
And I'll just grab a,
the little search here, text
that is sitting there at
the top. Right. And I
just cut a little, little
Chinese character. I'll just one
character. I'm just going to
copy it into my clipboard.
I'm gonna go back to
my two dot text and
I'll put it between and
B. So I'm looking at
this, a note pad, I
see a Chinese character BC,
and I'll save it and
we'll go back and we'll
say debug to dot text
D for dump. Ah, so
I see 61,  62
63. So those that Unicode
code point for that particular
Chinese character was three bytes
because utfh, isn't really saying
use, you know, use, use
two bites when you need
to, it's saying use more
than one bite when you
need to, I don't see
any, ah, bite order bites.
So markers typically, Wait, when
you have a string, there's
a couple of things you
can do. It's a little
complicated, but some, some systems,
basically guests, okay. On windows.
We know that, you know,
the processors a certain way.
So we pretty much know
that all windows code can
be done a certain way.
So we don't, They think
about it that they don't
guess they infer. Yeah. Now
if I go into notepad
too, and I go to
file and coding, I had
two choices. I had utfh
and I had utfh with
signature. So if I go
and switch that to utfh
with signature and run, debug
to dot text again, and
look at it, then I
see the ETF and the
different stuff. At the beginning
of it, I have the
little unique code signature at
the front, and then we
get into our text. So
how many choices that I
have there. Right? And here's
the trick though, if I
go and I say, encoding,
antsy, I get a warning
switching from ANSI to non-answer
and back will cause loss
of data hit. Yes. Suddenly
my Chinese character just turned
into three funky characters. It
split it apart. I lost
data and it turned to
crap. Scott, do you know
about the bugging, a notepad
or I don't know if
it's a bug or the
behavior, this API can break
the, this API can break
bug. You heard of this.
Yeah. This is, this is
the one where you type
in a certain phrase. And
because the phrase, you know,
falls a certain way, it
confuses the system because of
the order of the order
of bytes. Yeah. And I
believe it's like four character
where to three characters where
to three characters and then
a five character word. So
if you Google for quotes,
This API can break. You'll
find lots of information about
that. But if we go
into a notepad and we
type in this API can
break, we save it in
a file called food dot
text, and then we open
it, we close it, we
open it again. We get
back Chinese. Interesting. So if
I go out to the
command line and I type
in debug food texts, the
file that I just put
that into and I hit
D I see what looks
to me like some pretty
regular looking ASCII code, nothing
particularly interesting about that. Okay.
So the deal is, is
that there's a, there's a
function in windows that's called,
is text Unicode, right? So
you basically, you pass it
some data and it tells
you whether or not that
data is, is encoded as
Unicode. It really tells you
whether it's UTF 16 or
not. Okay. But the deal
is, like we mentioned before
in the talk that it,
it runs some, some guesses
basically, right? Guessing in computer
science is called heuristics. Right.
And we, we guess, and
it looks at it and
some short strings, if it
doesn't have a lot of
information, a very short ASCII
strings that have an even
number of lowercase letters, then
it will spit it out.
Now, if you look at
the documentation, of course, it
says that it's not foolproof.
And a lot of them
are based on statistics. So
if you pass in not
enough information, it doesn't get
enough data to build any
kind of statistics. I've actually
had this bug occur to
me during a demonstration where
I was using text files
on the desktop to illustrate
what objects are with, you
know, shortcuts and reference types
for shortcuts. And I would
pull up the, the file
that I had just saved
like a little bit of
text too. And I got
four or five blocks. Oh
yeah, totally. Yeah. I mean,
if you, I mean, this
putting in this app can
break or whatever is, is,
is a funny demo. But
if you just put in
the letter a, and then,
you know, a character turn
line feed that will fail,
it's three characters. It wasn't
nearly enough. Right now they
do point out though, in
the documentation that this is
not foolproof, it is statistical
analysis. They tell you that
it could break and they
do point out that failure
would have been preferable, right?
You'd rather to get garbage
English back than garbage Chinese,
because you don't want to
come up with some string
that might actually mean something
true. Yeah. That's a, that's
a, definitely an example of
this kind of stuff is
not easy. There's a really
great blog. We mentioned on
the last show by Michael
Kaplan, one of the internet
internationalization walks at Microsoft at
shrinks your slash G U
w and it's his blog
is called sorting it all
out really interesting stuff about
some of the obscurity and
craziness that happens within internationalization
and just general localization problems
on windows Scott. Before we
wrap up, let me ask
about Vista. What's a, what's
new in Vista for localization.
Well there's piles and piles
of, of new stuff in
Vista. There's the notion of,
of being able to have
a custom locale cause Vista
supports something like 200 different
locales and a hundred different
languages, but that's just a
tiny fraction of all the
different languages in the world.
So there's a couple of
things. One of them is
in beta. If you're running
a beta Vista, you can
get the locale builder at
shrinks, your slash GV one
to create a, a locale.
If you live in a
particular Island off the coast
of, of, I don't know,
Halifax somewhere, you might want
to create your specific locale,
right? If, if you decide
to start your own country,
Karl, you are gonna want
to add one to the
system, the local builders in
beta, you can take a
look at that. A couple
of things that you can
use now that are really
convenient. If you, if you
deal with globalization issues, which
aren't just strings, but also
things like time zones, you
know, you've personally had a
number of problems. We suffer
in gospel and dealing with
time zones because there's, there's
the time zone that the
servers in the time zone
that the reader's in and
the times on that, the
authors in, yep. There's a
really nice time zone utility,
Microsoft time zone, utility shrinks
there slash G U X
such in the tray and
let you know what the
time is and other, other
time zones, without having to
change your own times, that's
a really convenient tool that
they'll stuff up at the
global dev site is really
valuable. I think it's one
of the little known secrets
that on MSDN there's the
a, the NLS information page
is a really interesting page
to look at shrink slash
GV two, which has a
list of all the different
languages and locales that that
windows supports. And all of
this is coming off of
the global development and computing
portal at shrinks slash GV
three, including a number of
glossaries that they'll give you
for free. It's shrink stir
slash GV four, which are
basically all the different Microsoft
terminologies pre translated into other
languages. So if you're a
translator needs to know what
the appropriate term for file
edit view, help, whatever is
in the Microsoft parlance. They've
got glossaries that they'll give
you up at shrink slash
GV for grading of all
the different standards. Cause everyone
has a different feel and
you may not necessarily get
a localizer. Who's familiar with
the, the, the terminology that
Microsoft uses. One last thing.
Do you, do you use
the Gregorian calendar object for
date arithmetic? Well, we do.
We do some work in,
in Thailand. So we actually
have to deal with that
calendar as well as the
Thai Buddhist calendar, which is
a totally different calendar. It's
a pretty awesome object. It's
in-system dot globalization, duck, Gregorian
calendar, and allows you to
add app hocks and eras
and, you know, serious data
arithmetic and globalization. All the
globalization stuff is really, really
good date. You know, currency
info, date, format info. There's
a lot of really cool
stuff you can do where
you can say, well, I
like everything about this culture,
but I want to use
dollars or everything about their
current system except the date
format. I want to be
this way. Yeah, you can,
you can basically hard code
these things. If you want
your app to work a
certain way. There's a, there's
a lot of good stuff
in there. A couple of
other things, one that hasn't
been updated in awhile, the
enterprise localization toolkit by a
guy named Todd Abel has
basically been dropped and forgotten
about, but a lot of
people use it shrinks or
slash GV nine. Basically it
is a database, a SQL
database that'll hold all of
your strings and then generate
resources for you. Sometimes people
find dealing with their resources
in a database rather than
an XML is a lot
easier to deal with. Definitely
worth checking out. And then
one thing I didn't get
a chance to talk about,
which is something I'm really
interested in is, is text
direction going left to right,
right. To left. Oh, up
at stringer slash GV five.
There's a lot of really
good information. And if you're
going to do any kind
of HTML for middle Eastern
content, for anything that's going
to be in Arabic or,
or A Persian, take a
look at, you know, Farsi
shrink stir slash GV seven,
there's a specific site called
authoring HTML for middle Eastern
content. And that's a show,
I guess Scott. Huh? Yeah.
That was a little longer
than I thought, but it's
a really interesting topic I
could go on for hours.
I didn't, I didn't get
some of the stuff I
wanted to talk about. Maybe
we'll do a part two
on day. Oh, I'll throw
the links up there anyway.
So on behalf of myself
and Scott have a great
week and we'll see you
next week on handsome minutes.